good evening I'm Andrew Chang and I'm
Adrienne Arsenault things are changing
and they're changing fast the way we
live the way we work our sense of safety
but one thing that won't change our
commitment to you the program may look a
little different over the coming days
and weeks as we adapt to this new
reality but we will still be here with
the facts the advice from experts to
sort through it all with you because
this is the National tonight Canada
closes its borders to for us we will be
denying entry to Canada to people who
are not Canadian citizens or permanent
residents with a major exception why is
the United States exact BC reports three
more deaths from an outbreak at a
long-term care home from those in
isolation fear it could get worse how to
protect the most vulnerable our experts
are standing by your abroad it's time
for you to come home Canadians stranded
abroad as airlines cut flights markets
taking businesses closing shelves empty
the economic toll extensive coverage of
the corona virus pandemic
[Applause]
well if Canadians haven't felt the
coronavirus changing their lives they
have now every day every hour
it seems Kovac 19 appears closer to
shoving this country down even as the
government's response ramps up we've
decided to take increasingly aggressive
steps to keep you and your family safe
among those steps largely closing
Canada's borders after the number of
cases more than doubled since Friday to
at least 410 the number of deaths has
quadrupled to four after BC announced
three more fatalities today the number
of cases in Ontario now exceeds the
total number of cases in the entire
country
last week the w-h-o urges all countries
to double down on prevention we have a
simple message for all countries
test test test and to underscore that
urgency the cold reality of the
statistics over a hundred and eighty
thousand cases around the world to date
well over seven thousand deaths at least
a hundred and fifty-five affected
countries ever climbing numbers causing
some panic some uncertainty and
certainly global economic chaos so for
weeks Ottawa had resisted imposing tough
border restrictions but that all changed
today as Canada now moves to seal itself
off to all but a favored few David
Cochrane begins our coverage tonight he
is the prime minister of a country that
prides itself on welcoming the world and
he's telling billions they can't come
here we will be denying entry to Canada
to people who are not Canadian citizens
or permanent residents a wartime measure
to defeat a viral enemy with a big
exception for the United States
Canada's closest ally we recognize that
the level of integration of our two
economies and the coordination that we
have we've had over the past while puts
the u.s. in a separate category from the
rest of the world Americans can still
enter but we'll be
to self isolate for 14 days the same as
Canadians returning home and that US
exception is being reviewed by the our
not that British Columbia needs that our
with an epidemic next door in Washington
state don't come that is the wrong thing
to do we understand that people are
being else asked to self isolate but
better than self isolate for visitors is
not to come
that canada-us border in particular is a
lifeline that means even more exceptions
to keep supply chains intact flight
crews can enter without self isolation
so can crews of trains boats and trucks
that cross the border by Wednesday most
international flights will be funneled
to four airports Montreal Toronto
Calgary Vancouver Canadians can still
fly home unless they're sick any
passenger regardless of citizenship with
possible kovat 19 symptoms will not be
allowed to board flights to Canada to
this point Ottawa has resisted extreme
border measures but the positive cases
of kovat 19 have doubled in just days
right now what we're seeing is that sort
of upward ticking of the curve of that
epidemic curve which with a number of
increases in cases over the weekend as
well so the day over they increase tells
us something and if the government is
telling us anything is to stay home as
much as possible avoid crowds bigger
than 50 urging Canadians to come
together by staying apart David Cochran
CBC News Ottawa
now even as the number of cases
continued to grow Canada's death toll
from kovat 19 had for days been limited
to a single patient at a BC long-term
care facility now three more patients
there have died and as you'll see from
tina love green at that facility there
is a struggle not just with sickness but
also despair
and I want to go back in for my dad but
it worried for myself that my son
Kelly chalant is staying in as a
precaution
after attending to her 81 year old
father last week who lives at the Linn
Valley care center a dozen health care
workers there have tested positive now a
total of four residents have died at op
situation for a guy who loves dancing
and being outside but at least for now
the rules allow a large sister to be
with him everything is happening here so
quickly we spoke to the sister from
outside the care home which she says is
short-staffed but doing their best
because of the outbreak residents are
kept in their rooms and starting today
visitors are only allowed into long-term
care homes in BC if its end-of-life care
or under strict rules how important it
is for us to come together as a
community to connect on a daily basis at
least with with the people in our
community who are in isolation and who
aren't able to have visitors and those
are the people of shalad worries about
the most
Tina love green CBC News North Vancouver
BC okay joining me now dr. Samir s'en
director of geriatrics for Sinai Health
System dr. Sen oh you know what that
feeling of isolation can come anxiety as
we so clearly see how do we find the
right balance and staying mentally
healthy yeah I think my heart goes out
to folks especially who have loved ones
in long-term care homes because recently
many jurisdictions have now said don't
go and visit your loved ones unless it's
an absolute emergency and so you know
how do you actually create that support
network that your loved ones value and
this is where we're recommending that
look at things like video visits
telephone calls what you can do because
that connection is important for both
parties and we have to remember that
when we're not just thinking about the
healthcare and the the clinical aspects
of social distancing and when it comes
to a person's daily life and and if
you're an older Canadian either inside a
care home or even if you're just living
at home are we at a point where you
should you should just be avoiding other
people as much as possible well I think
this is the the concern that some places
are saying that we should avoid visiting
anybody who's older in our lives and and
those who are old should stay indoors
and not go out at all and I don't think
that's really fair I think the key is
that all of us need to protect each
other by practicing appropriate social
distancing but it's about limiting
unnecessary contact but that human
contact is really important and there
are ways in which we can do it safely
and of course if you're sick stay away
from other people in the matter
absolutely dr. Steiner thank so much in
Ontario and late tonight in Vancouver
calls for more action to enforce social
distancing in Vancouver downtown bars
and restaurants will be closed tomorrow
for st. Patrick's Day in Ontario as
Ellen Morrow explains a call for some
wider shutouts
at this Toronto bar the st. Patrick's
Day party is over before it even began
its doors will close indefinitely at
midnight we had seen the writing on the
wall so to speak over the last weekend
we canceled all of our produce orders
last few days following Quebec yesterday
Ontario's top doctor today called for
bars and restaurants to be shuttered
over fears of community spread what the
amount of cases and lab tests flowing
through there are some that do not seem
to have a travel history or a contact
case at this stage across Canada empty
streets closed businesses amidst a
deepening lockdown school suspended in
all but a few provinces visits to long
term care homes restricted and elective
surgeries postponed all necessary
measures says this expert and timing is
everything if you're going to do social
distancing you need to do it for real
and you need to do it early on if you're
trying to control things today bc joined
other provinces in closing casinos like
others it's also banning gatherings of
more than 50 people this is not forever
but it is important for now and for the
foreseeable future
Canada's chance to slow the spread of CO
vid 19 is waning says the nation's chief
doctor all Canadians must act now to
take all precautions and practice social
distancing and so a plea from the Prime
Minister all Canadians as much as
possible should stay home protect your
health and that of those around you that
means closing down when in any other
year celebrations would just be getting
started right this isn't a restaurant
issue this isn't a City of Toronto issue
this is a worldwide issue
Ellen waro CBC News Toronto regardless
of jurisdiction some businesses are
choosing to change the way they operate
right now to prevent people from
gathering so today Tim Hortons announced
that starting tomorrow there will be no
dining room seating at any of its
restaurants Starbucks started that
yesterday moving to a to-go model across
Canada and this evening McDonald's
announced its going the same route
allowing carry out and drive-through
orders but no eat-in options now crucial
to slowing down the spread of this virus
is making sure people arriving in Canada
from outside know that they need to self
isolate for two weeks and as Allison
Northcott shows us after complaints that
message just wasn't getting through
Montreal is acting travelers arriving at
Montreal's Trudeau Airport from abroad
are now greeted by teams from Montreal
Public Health with support from local
police there to reinforce the message to
self isolate for 14 days
Montreal mayor plant says prevention
measures need to be stepped up we need
to make sure that people get it this is
not something we take lightly we want to
contain the virus the fastest we do this
the better and they're the fastest will
will go back to our normal life some
international travelers who returned
home on the weekend said they weren't
getting the message to self isolate I
work at a hospital so I knew coming home
but if you didn't have that information
already coming home then I think it
would be good to explain to people
Canada Border Services Agency screams
passengers arriving from abroad a
spokesperson said they are ramping up
measures including new information
pamphlets and signage and additional
officers but today at Toronto's Pearson
Airport what they told you regarding a
quarantine with the 14 days to border
agents the border agents what I know I
just read it
the machine that I had to put that paper
in it says are you aware do you
acknowledge that we advised for you to
be quarantined for 14 days that was all
nobody said a word the federal
government says it's now asking all
international travelers to declare any
symptoms along with that acknowledgment
of the request to self isolate it was
actually recorded in writing on your
customs card okay of course still some
travelers are resistant and Montreal
health officials say that's why this
operation is so crucial Allyson
Northcott CBC News Montreal a quarantine
may not sound ideal to returning
Canadians already exhausted and stressed
out but at least they're home for others
the clock is ticking Thomas Degel looks
at the growing desperation of Canadians
trying to get back any way they can
welcome to Fletcher news be getting
calls for help
this travel agency flooded with
questions from Canadians overseas now in
a rush to get home borders have become
increasingly tighter and they're
becoming more and more closed and more
restrictive in terms of what their
options what our customers options are
from the federal government an urgent
message if you're abroad it's time for
you to come home but for some that's a
challenge like the dozens of Canadians
at Casablanca 's airport stock since
Morocco shut down international flights
turning Katelyn MacDonald's 30th
birthday dream vacation into something
of a nightmare or how about those on
board the Norwegian spirit sailing
somewhere off the coast of South Africa
after repeatedly being denied port even
though no one's tested positive the
government is promising emergency loans
of up to five thousand dollars for
citizens left stranded abroad there will
be a a fund to provide some financial
assistance to
those Canadians but that's cold comfort
when the airline won't even pick up the
phone Air Canada is promising discounts
on one-way fares for returning Canadians
while WestJet simply pledges to return
as many Canadians home as possible
Sunwing meanwhile has stopped outbound
flights focusing solely on repatriating
a hundred thousand customers or
Frankfurt those are some answers for the
frantic callers to that Travel Agency
but as the corona virus spreads quickly
travel trouble does to Thomas diagnose
CBC News Toronto so travelers may be
unsure of where they go next but markets
today well they moved with decisive
violent speed downward the Dow Jones was
savaged losing about 3000 points that is
13% of its value lost in a single day
overall the Dow has lost about 30% of
its value in a matter of just a few
weeks and on the other indexes the story
is similar including the TSX which today
dropped 10% so there's often a
disconnect between markets and the real
economy but as Peter Armstrong points
out not this time nothing is normal
anymore even social distancing at the
opening bell couldn't prevent the
sell-off everyone was bracing for it
within seconds circuit breakers kicked
in halting trading across the board
clearly volatility absolutely a repeat
of last week
this latest sell-off sparked at least in
part as shockingly bad data from China
showed just how devastating a hit its
economy took during the height of the
crisis their retail sales in January in
February fell more than 20% factory
output fell more than 13% even a bold
and surprising move from the US Federal
Reserve didn't hold off the wave of
selling unsurprisingly
the markets haven't really taken the
central bank easing from last night
particularly well the Fed cut interest
rates effectively 2-0 made it easier for
Bank
financial institutions to borrow money
for longer and it announced plans to buy
700 billion dollars in bonds essentially
creating money out of thin air and
injecting it into the economy even the
White House lacked its usual certainty
about markets today it is what it is we
think it's going to get better but
that's you know we'll see
but monetary policy can only do so much
consider the most common jobs in Canada
for men truck drivers for women retail
sales as many people stay home shops
will close some deliveries won't be
needed people and businesses already up
to their ears in debt will struggle to
pay their bills our focus right now is
on ensuring that Canadians who are
staying home from work have enough money
to be able to buy groceries and pay
their rent
the government says to expect more
announcements on that front tomorrow
Peter MC on CBC News Toronto there is
one industry booming right now
grocery stores inundated with panicked
shoppers we've shown you the long lines
in the bare shelves right across the
country and as Kitty Nicholson explains
there's growing concern some supplies
won't last in 14 years in the grocery
business
Robert Lima has never seen meat move
quite as quickly as the last three days
which sales up a whopping 400 percent
even though the demand is sky-high he's
confident he won't run out calm down
calm down
I'll be right back we're not gonna run
out of meat you won't run out of product
just buy what you need come back another
day don't panic it's a message shared by
the big guys to Loblaws reassuring
panicked shoppers it will keep goods on
its shelves and that it would not under
any circumstance change its actions or
prices to take advantage of kovat 19
and while most of the supply chain is
immune to the pandemic new travel
restrictions announced today could have
a serious impact on Canada's homegrown
food supply around this time every year
nearly 50,000 migrant workers come north
to labor on Canada's farms today worries
those crucial workers won't be allowed
into the country we can't get labor
let's say indefinitely
it would really shut down a lot of the a
lot of the horticultural sector in
Canada and so yeah if we lost that labor
source completely it would be you just
can't you can't grow you can't grow the
crops that producers agree would create
food security problems they're not
allowed to come in we will have no crop
at the end of this year we have no
people to be able to work it these
people are experienced workers they
worked for us for 20-plus years and they
have good reason to worry multiple
industry sources confirm the federal
government told them that temporary
foreign workers will not be allowed in
the country but the industry is hopeful
something can be arranged to safely
bring the workers into Canada and on to
the farms
Katie Nicholson CBC News Toronto the
online retailer Amazon says it is
overwhelmed with demand during the
corona virus outbreak and to deal with
it the company is hiring a hundred
thousand warehouse and delivery workers
they're also getting a temporary raise
of $2 an hour through to the end of
April this weekend Amazon admitted some
of its deliveries would take longer than
usual in part because it's having
trouble getting inventory now you've got
questions about the corona virus we've
got some answers from the facts to the
fears beginning tonight a regular
segment to help put all of your concerns
into context Plus
tracking the coronavirus probably an
equal number of people will die because
I can't get treated for their heart
attack with their stroke what the math
and the medicine say about the future
and the changes few have seen coming
it's bad it's bad and the US president
announces another round of restrictions
aimed at keeping Americans safe we're
back into
okay let's bring you up to speed on the
big picture around the world there have
been more than 180 1000 confirmed cases
of kovat 19 more than 7000 people have
died and more than 78,000 have recovered
and sure the scale of these ever-growing
numbers pretty scary but they also
reflect an important fact testing is
going up and we're seeing that in North
America which went from just over a
thousand cases last week to nearly 5,000
now today down south the US president
announced measures to fight what he
called an invisible enemy
Katie Simpson has more from Washington
the president arrived armed with a plan
aiming to slow the spread of the disease
a plan that will alter daily life for
more than 330 million Americans we've
made the decision to further toughen the
guidelines in blunt the infection now
people should avoid gathering in groups
of 10 or more avoid eating in
restaurants food courts and stop
drinking in bars kids should be kept
home from school and most importantly if
you are sick no matter who you are
please stay home the guidelines are in
place for the next 15 days but Donald
Trump admits the problem may last much
longer people are talking about July
August
something like that so it could be right
in that period of time where it I say
wash it washes through the appeal from
the White House is aimed at everyone
including healthy young adults in part
after scenes like this one in New
Orleans party goers mixing and mingling
despite pleas from authorities to stay
home it isn't an overreaction it's a
reaction that we feel is commencement
which is actually going on in reality
the Trump administration has been widely
criticized for its overall response and
mixed messaging if you're talking about
the virus you know that's not under
control for any place in the world I
think I read I think
now I didn't know I was talking about
what we're doing is under control
some states didn't wait for the
guidelines introducing their own
measures in New Jersey the governor is
asking people to stay in after 8 p.m.
and in Maryland police there will
enforce mandatory shutdowns this is
going to be much harder take much longer
and be much worse than almost anyone is
currently understanding for now Donald
Trump says a widespread lockdown like
what is happening in parts of Europe is
not under consideration
Katie Simpson CBC News Washington for
many countries the battle against the
virus has shifted from preventing its
arrival to containing its spread nowhere
is that more clear than in Europe the
current epicenter of this global
outbreak what we're announcing today is
a very substantial change in the way
that we want people to live their lives
Prime Minister Boris Johnson drastically
ramped up the UK's response today
encouraging people to avoid restaurants
pubs and theaters and stop all
non-essential contact with others the
shift comes after days of criticism that
his government wasn't doing enough
Britain is also expected to ask everyone
over the age of 70 to self isolate for
up to three months
vonabell a votre sauce the
responsibility in la salida a French
president Emmanuel macron announced an
almost total shutdown of the country
that's a step similar to what Italy and
Spain have done in a televised address
na'kal ordered people to stay at home
and go out only for essential needs the
measures go into effect tomorrow and
will be in place for at least 15 days
Nicole says anyone who violates the
order will be punished though he didn't
specify how
and German Chancellor Angela Merkel
introduced border controls today
allowing through only residents
cross-border commuters and physical
goods new border protocols also include
health checks with officials registering
anyone displaying symptoms with the
health authorities almost all shops will
close except for grocery stores banks
pharmacies and gas stations well you
have a lot of questions about kovat 19
and starting tonight we are devoting a
regular segment to answering them the
doctors are in and standing by plus
tracking the virus what modeling can
tell us about the path of the pandemic
and when it will likely
welcome back
new school closures new quarantine new
border restrictions the pace of change
is jarring Lee rapid because the goal is
to slow the virus down to give hospitals
a hope of keeping up but is it enough
long before Kovach 19 appeared
researchers predicted how a pandemic
like this would play out and now they
say both the virus and the response
could go much further privacy activists
the world over may wince but China makes
no apologies for this enforcing
isolation and quarantine in ways the
West cannot fathom QR codes on phones
that track a person's travel and health
status and either clears them or
prevents them from moving around it's my
first time to come outside after the
epidemic but I already used the QR codes
several times and I think it's good and
it was back in early February which now
feels like a long time ago that China
was leading the way in herding a
population into compliance this elderly
woman in Inner Mongolia chased and
chastised by a drone for not wearing a
mask is any of this and it works for
North America lots of diseases there are
doctors who wish it worked but also know
it's harder here we could not do it here
and I don't think most democracies could
do that it's really about leadership and
it's about getting the people to
understand the critical role they play
in protecting their communities
but look how tough that's been this was
a bar in Nashville Tennessee just this
weekend and a scene like that will make
a man like this see dr. Eric toner whose
office is surrounded with the tomes of
doom
is with Johns Hopkins he ran the
simulation last fall of a new and deadly
coronavirus invited health and business
officials from around the world to do a
dry run of how a pandemic would impact
the planet and what to do about it
international travel has turned local
epidemics into a pandemic spanning
everything happening now in the real
world he says happened in the simulation
and right on anticipated schedule in
your modelling did you have a sense of
an additional maybe mortality rate from
non kovat 19 related cases as a result
of a pandemic it's probably reasonable
to assume that the case fatality rate
will double because of inability to
access care case fatality rate for
anything yeah
probably an equal number of people will
die because they can't get treated for
their heart attack with their stroke you
know if you're having a heart attack you
need treatment right then if you're
having a stroke you need immediate
treatment and if you if the hospital
can't take you in for those conditions
then you're in a lot of trouble consider
that a warning the strain on hospitals
is the obsession that keeps mathematical
modelers up at night if you were
infected on average you would infect two
to three new people and each of those
people would go on to in fact two to
three new people in Toronto Ashley choot
has worked through the numbers for
Ontario and the range of measures
required to not just keep people healthy
but keep the hospital's functional
everything from closing schools and
restaurants to a total shutdown so the
most effective is
this one here which is where you tell
everybody in the population to
effectively stay at home like Italy if
you just tell everybody just don't go to
work yeah don't go to school yeah but
it's not a straight line the peaks of
infection inner modeling suggests the
need for total quarantine for a while
and when that happens you see the dips
and infection so people go back to
activity and then the rate rises again
only to have citizens sent back home
this pattern repeats until the line
flattens and so you can imagine that
this would be incredibly disruptive and
you have this this strategy over the
course of two years
exactly you're not talking if everybody
stays home for two weeks we're done
no that needs to sink in we're all in
for the long haul but dr. toner says
he's seen enough to believe there is
hope beyond a vaccine we think that
we're going to have treatments for Co
vat19 in a matter of months we're not
gonna have a vaccine for a year or two
or more but we probably are going to
have some therapeutics and some drugs
that can be beneficial
those can move much more quickly than
vaccines can and long-term where does
this end the math and the medicine say
it ends when the whole planet has
immunity because either the whole planet
has had the virus or the vaccine period
once we get to nearly complete immunity
it'll continue to spread and what we
think will happen eventually is that
this will become a childhood illness
like the other four strains of
coronavirus that caused the common cold
this will probably become just yet
another childhood illness
one day but not now and not soon well
just ahead on our program answers to
some of your questions about keeping
healthy and safe during this pandemic
Plus social distancing 101 is it still
okay to grab that cup of coffee what
about going for a run outside
welcome back
new school closures new quarantine new
border restrictions the pace of change
is jarring Lee rapid because the goal is
to slow the virus down to give hospitals
a hope of keeping up but is it enough
long before Kovach 19 appeared
researchers predicted how a pandemic
like this would play out and now they
say both the virus and the response
could go much further privacy activists
the world over may wince but China makes
no apologies for this enforcing
isolation and quarantine in ways the
West cannot fathom QR codes on phones
that track a person's travel and health
status and either clears them or
prevents them from moving around it's my
first time to come outside after the
epidemic but I already used the QR codes
several times and I think it's good and
it was back in early February which now
feels like a long time ago that China
was leading the way in herding a
population into compliance this elderly
woman in Inner Mongolia chased and
chastised by a drone for not wearing a
mask is any of this in the works for
North America lots of diseases there are
doctors who wish it were but also know
it's harder here we could not do it here
and I don't think most democracies could
do that it's really about leadership and
it's about getting the people to
understand the critical role they play
in protecting their communities
but look how tough that's been this was
a bar in Nashville Tennessee just this
weekend and a scene like that will make
a man like this see dr. Eric toner whose
office is surrounded with the tomes of
doom
is with Johns Hopkins he ran the
simulation last fall of a new and deadly
coronavirus invited health and business
officials from around the world to do a
dry run of how a pandemic would impact
the planet and what to do about it
international travel has turned local
epidemics into a pandemic spanning
everything happening now in the real
world he says happened in the simulation
and right on anticipated schedule in
your modelling did you have a sense of
an additional maybe mortality rate from
non kovat 19 related cases as a result
of of a pandemic it's probably
reasonable to assume that the case
fatality rate will double because of
inability to access care case fatality
rate for anything yeah probably an equal
number of people will die because I
can't get treated for their heart attack
with their stroke you know if you're
having a heart attack you need treatment
right then if you're having a stroke you
need immediate treatment and if you if
the hospital can't take you in for those
conditions then you're in a lot of
trouble consider that a warning the
strain on hospitals is the obsession
that keeps mathematical modelers up at
night if you were infected on average
you would infect two to three new people
and each of those people would go on to
in fact two to three new people in
Toronto
Ashley choot has worked through the
numbers for Ontario and the range of
measures required to not just keep
people healthy but keep the hospital's
functional everything from closing
schools and restaurants to a total
shutdown so the most effective is this
one here which is where you tell
everybody in the population to
effectively stay at home like Italy you
just tell everybody just don't go to
work yeah yeah but it's not a straight
line the peaks of infection in her
modeling suggests the need for total
quarantine for a while and when that
happens you see the dips and infection
so people go back to activity and then
the rate rises again only to have
citizens sent back home this pattern
repeats until the line flattens and so
you can imagine that this would be
incredibly disruptive and you have this
this strategy over the course of two
years
exactly you're not talking if everybody
stays home for two weeks we're done no
that needs to sink in we're all in for
the long haul
but dr. toner says he's seen enough to
believe there is hope beyond a vaccine
we think that we're gonna have
treatments for Co vat19 in a matter of
months we're not gonna have a vaccine
for a year or two or more but we
probably are going to have some
therapeutics and some drugs that can be
beneficial
those can move much more quickly than
vaccines can and long-term where does
this end the math and the medicine say
it ends when the whole planet has
immunity because either the whole planet
has had the virus or the vaccine period
once we get to nearly complete immunity
it'll continue to spread and what we
think will happen eventually is that
this will become a childhood illness
like the other four strains of
coronavirus that caused the common cold
this will probably become just yet
another childhood illness
one day but not now and not soon well
just ahead on our program answers to
some of your questions about keeping
healthy and safe during this pandemic
Plus social distancing 101 is it still
okay to grab that cup of coffee what
about going for a run outside
[Music]
welcome back the flood of information
coming out about kovat 19 right now can
feel overwhelming new Canadian cases are
being reported every day new rules and
recommendations are being put into place
to slow the spread of this coronavirus
and you like us have a lot of questions
so we're dedicating part of our program
every night to answering them with a
team of doctors tonight we're joined by
dr. Samir Gupta a Respironics and
associate professor at the University of
Toronto and dr. Samir Sinha the director
of geriatrics at Sinai Health System
good evening to the both of you dr.
Gupta maybe we'll start our first
question
going over to you how socially distant
do I need to be should I stay home
whenever possible so I think you know if
people are quarantined then they're
confined to their homes by definition
and what I would say now is that if
you're not quarantined you should act as
though you are quarantined so we really
are encouraging people to stay home and
avoid all contacts and that means even
contacts with family just stay with the
people that are in your immediate home
and don't expose yourself to anybody
outside of that if you don't have to and
what about something like taking the
kids or the grandkids to a playground is
that okay
not unless that playground is completely
empty and so you know that you know we
contemplated that ourselves but the
reality is that if a few different
people have that idea then a few
different people are there so we're just
not in a position where even that is a
great idea right now okay dr. zeno
second question goes to you if I'm
returning home from travel abroad when
the self-isolation
start I mean okay can you take a cab
home right I mean you have to find a way
to get yourself home and we're starting
we're trying to say be smart about it
you know try and get home as soon as
possible you know don't you know go
visit your friends go out dancing and go
grocery shopping get home as soon as
possible try and do it in the way that
minimizes the most contact that might
have to be a cab and and just make sure
that other people could potentially do
things like get your groceries but
remember self-isolation 14 days
and Andrew all add to that but you know
youyou may be returning from a foreign
destination you may feel like you're
fine but in the last few days in
particular we've now seen studies
suggesting that many people will be able
to transmit this pre symptomatically
which means before they develop symptoms
and in some cases a symptomatically so
you may will be able to spread this
without even being sick and so it's
absolutely essential that you go
straight home and and don't make any
stops and then start your self isolation
okay dr. Gupta this question goes to you
this is when we get an awful lot what
are the symptoms I should be watching
for so unfortunately the symptoms of
this are really the same symptoms as you
get with the common cold so people will
get sore throat they might get a runny
nose
fevers body aches they can get a cough
the sort of red flag which indicates
that it's it's gone on to the lungs and
it now become more serious if you get
short of breath and if you have any of
those symptoms are you supposed to just
assume that you have kovat 19:00 and
sort of go into self isolation
unfortunately you know it's it's also
flu season and it's a time of year where
people are still catching a lot of colds
so it's very hard to make that
distinction in an ideal world I would
say that you should get tested but
probably because we don't have enough
test kits around we're still limiting
testing to people who have symptoms and
who have travelled so the answer is yes
you should self isolate in case you do
have this and you should call the kppen
helpline and you should call your family
doctor don't go to your family doctor's
office but call them and ask their
advice doctor Sinha can this coronavirus
stick to my jacket when I go outdoors
well if you're not socially distancing
yourself and you're your friend sneezes
for example you know we that's why we
talk about two meters that's six feet
apart because again things can stick to
surfaces hard surfaces are what the
corona virus likes more and the member
hours two days is how long you can last
so could technically lasts on your
jacket especially if you haven't spent
enough time apart and are you supposed
to then what disinfect your jacket every
time you come on well I mean it's I mean
again within reason but again you know
this is where we want to up our cleaning
and making sure that if we do think that
we
when sneezed on her jacket or whatever
yeah put it in the wash okay dr. Gupta I
think we have one more question here and
it is when will things get back to
normal I wish I had the answer to that
all I can say is I don't think it's
going to be days or weeks I think it's
going to be months and I think when
whenever that normal comes it will be a
new normal
I think we'll all probably be bearing
some scars of this and only time will
tell dr. Singh I hear that a lot new
normal what's your take on this I
absolutely agree right now none of us
have a crystal ball we're just really
hoping that if all Canadians can pitch
in together what your neighbors do and
what you do it counts and we all have to
stick in this together
dr. Sinha dr. Gupta thanks for joining
us tonight thank you thank you
now as we mentioned we will be asking
York Ovid 19 questions every night going
forward so send us any that you have you
can message us directly on Instagram at
CBC the national or send us an email at
the National at cbc.ca we've been
hearing a lot about the importance of
social distancing well 93 year old Mel
Brooks and his son Max explain why if I
get the corona virus I'll probably be
okay but if I give it to him he could
give it to Carl Reiner who could give it
to Dick Van Dyke and before I know it
I've wiped out a whole generation of
comedic legends when we come back what
social distancing should look like in
your life
I'm jb+ Owen tomorrow on CBC's daily
news podcast front burner a man with
cerebral palsy explains how for him
social distancing can make the
difference between life and death
subscribe wherever you get your podcasts
[Music]
welcome back if there is one thing you
can do to protect yourself and others
from the coronavirus it is social
distancing we all know it means keep
your distance but how can you do that
and still perform everyday tasks
we asked Erika Johnson to find out hit
up a major grocery store these days
they're crowded when I first went in I
thought I'm in some sort of weird movie
it was just insanity you know just like
everybody's just it's never seen
anything like up everywhere we hear it
practice social distancing but the
message doesn't seem to be getting
through there's no social distancing
going on right now and there at all
the lineups are back to that to get some
practical tips we do some social
distancing and FaceTime an infectious
disease expert his first tip if you're
in one of those crowded lineups ask for
space like this so excuse me you
wouldn't mind stepping back by a meteor
so that we all have our own space thank
you he doesn't recommend meeting up for
a drink or a bite to eat these days and
neither does the mayor of Vancouver I am
asking all residents to think twice
about whether they need to go out into
public and visit bars and restaurants
how about when you're just out for a
walk no need to decode of the way if
someone's coming says our expert staying
on the same side of the street as
somebody else is a very very small risk
of transmitting and infection with March
break upon us lots of kids are out of
school still okay to let them play
outside keeping them at home would
probably there would be the
recommendation at this point but I
understand that leaving the house every
now and then and going the message from
bc's top health officer social
distancing is hard but necessary this is
what we need to do in our community
to keep people safe to keep our family
safe and to stop this virus from having
the impact that we've seen in many other
countries around the world
health experts hope the social
distancing message will take hold so
questions like this prompt a different
answer are you worried about how close
everyone is together in there
Erica Johnson CBC News Vancouver now
unfortunately not everyone is taking
social distancing seriously and that can
be a big problem for those most
vulnerable including people with
compromised immune systems some of them
have been putting out please on social
media for people to stay home and we
wanted to give a few of them a chance to
explain why taking extra care is so
important my name is Lena Anderson I
live in Toronto and I'm actually worried
about co19 my name is Jessica and this
is my son Jackson and he's 6 months and
I have asthma my name is Stephanie de
Pardo I'm 24 years old I have a
condition it's a type of arthritis
I have rheumatoid arthritis and take a
medication that's processed by immune
system that means I'm more likely to
catch anything infectious and if I do
catch it much more likely to have us be
a case of it my Mon Remicade which
suppresses my immune system four years
ago to this day actually I had the flu
and got pneumonia and complications and
I ended up in the ICU for almost a month
much of that sedated and on a ventilator
I was lucky to survive
I almost didn't you are putting other
people's lives at risk someone like me
who has asthma some like mice
son who's six months old when everyone's
saying that we should be social
distancing a lot of people my age aren't
listening because they think oh this
won't affect me this won't affect anyone
I know I get it you want a party you
want to live your life you don't want to
be stuck at home we are all in this
together so let's help each other stay
home please as kovat 19 forces Canadians
to settle into a new reality and new
routines how small acts of kindness are
helping many get through the tough days
our moment is coming up
we all feel the weight of this pandemic
but even in the midst of it there are
smiling faces like this one
so people across the country are
offering small and creative acts of
kindness to help others make it through
these days and that is our moment
normally open at 9:00 a.m. we opened at
8:00 a.m. for seniors only
I thought we create opportunity to let
the seniors in as we all know they're
the most vulnerable population right now
we had about a hundred seniors through
and some of their helpers which was
great to see I know and delivered them
to the people along my street just to
say if they needed groceries or we're
too scared to go out that I could go and
do that for them I have a family that I
know quite well and they are panicking
trying to get back I went and stopped
their fridge just so that when they
return they won't be having to leave
normally we have something set up where
people can get food for free at our
restaurant and we just kind of didn't
want to leave them high and dry so we
met and just decided that we could hand
out free lunches so it really feels like
we have lots of support in this I mean
it's obviously a different kind of
coming together because we can't
physically be together but there's not
often that everyone's United and the
same thing all at once yeah no kidding
so the key to all this kindness is are
these care mongering groups and if you
look it up on Facebook you can find it
in your neighborhood but our producer
Eliza who spoke with a woman today who
has a chemo appointment tomorrow she
can't miss it she put out a request and
is inundated with people saying oh I'll
help you right well yeah and I mean just
goes to show you the single most
important thing that you can do amidst
all of this is not something that'll
necessarily benefit yourself but benefit
others that's the national for this
March 16th have a great night
[Music]
you